Add Runner Provisioner preview documentation (#10311)
circleci/circleci-docs: docs/guides/modules/execution-runner/pages/runner-provisioner.adoc

= Runner Provisioner

> :page-platform: Cloud, Server v4+

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:page-platform: Cloud, Server v4+
:page-badge: Preview
```

:page-description: Learn how to install and configure Runner Provisioner to automatically scale CircleCI runner VMs using KubeVirt on Kubernetes.
:experimental:

[CAUTION]
====
Runner Provisioner is currently in preview. The product, its configuration schema, and its APIs are subject to change before general availability. It is not recommended for production workloads. If you encounter issues or have feedback, see <<feedback-and-support,Feedback and Support>>.
====

> Runner Provisioner is a Kubernetes controller that automatically scales CircleCI runner VMs using KubeVirt. It polls the CircleCI API for pending and running tasks, then adjusts a `VirtualMachinePool` replica count to match demand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Runner Provisioner is a Kubernetes controller that automatically scales CircleCI runner VMs using link:https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt[KubeVirt]. Runner Provisioner polls the CircleCI API for pending and running tasks, then adjusts a `VirtualMachinePool` replica count to match demand.
```

> Runner Provisioner is a Kubernetes controller that automatically scales CircleCI runner VMs using KubeVirt. It polls the CircleCI API for pending and running tasks, then adjusts a `VirtualMachinePool` replica count to match demand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Runner Provisioner is a Kubernetes controller that automatically scales CircleCI runner virtual machines (VMs) using KubeVirt. It polls the CircleCI API for pending and running tasks, then adjusts a `VirtualMachinePool` replica count to match demand.
```

The current preview version is `0.1.0`.

[#getting-access]
== Getting access

Runner Provisioner is available to invited preview participants only. To request access, fill out the link:https://forms.gle/7W8z12EBdjuiTQJWA[Runner Provisioner preview access request form].

> Once access is granted, you will receive credentials for the image registry referenced in the <<quick-start,Quick Start>>.

Reviewer: Do you also get added to the Slack channel at this point, the one described in the next section?

Author: Yes.

[#feedback-and-support]
== Feedback and support

Runner Provisioner is available to invited preview participants only. As a preview customer, expect bugs and missing features — this is early-stage software and sharp edges are normal.

> In exchange, detailed feedback is expected. Your input directly shapes what gets built before GA. You have direct access to the CircleCI product and engineering team throughout the preview.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In exchange, detailed feedback is expected. Your input directly shapes what gets built before general availability. You have direct access to the CircleCI product and engineering team throughout the preview.
```

> For troubleshooting, escalate directly via the Slack channel below — do not open a support ticket. Issues are routed directly to the product team with a 24-hour internal response target.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For troubleshooting, escalate directly via the `#runner-provisioner-preview` Slack channel. Do not open a support ticket for issues with Runner Provisioner. Issues are routed directly to the product team with a 24-hour internal response target.
```

* *Bugs and feature requests*: Post in the `#runner-provisioner-preview` Slack channel.

> * *General questions*: Post in the `#runner-provisioner-preview` Slack channel (preview participants only).

Reviewer: This makes it look line non-preview participants can report bugs and request features. Just checking that's not intended?
```suggestion
* *General questions*: Post in the `#runner-provisioner-preview` Slack channel .
```

[#prerequisites]
== Prerequisites

* A Kubernetes cluster with KubeVirt installed. Refer to the link:https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/main/docs/compatibility.md[KubeVirt compatibility matrix] for the appropriate version for your cluster. Runner Provisioner has been tested with v1.8.
* `kubectl` configured against your cluster.
* `helm` v3+.
* A CircleCI runner resource class and its associated resource class token. Create one in the CircleCI web app under **Self-Hosted Runners**. This token is used by the agent running on the VM to authenticate with CircleCI and claim and execute jobs for that resource class.
* A CircleCI API token with permission to query runner tasks. This may be a personal API token or a project API token with read-only access.
* An image pull secret named `regcred` in the target namespace. The Helm chart references this by default.

[#cluster-requirements]
== Cluster requirements

> 

Reviewer: insert Intro text to detail what is in this section

[#nested-virtualization]
=== Nested virtualization

KubeVirt runs VMs inside Kubernetes pods. Each node that will host runner VMs must expose `/dev/kvm` — the node itself must support hardware-accelerated virtualization (either bare metal, or a cloud VM with nested virtualization enabled).

> Verify KVM is available on a node by checking the `virt-handler` pod on that node.

Reviewer: Spell out KVM at first use

Get a list of `virt-handler` pods:

[source,console]
----
$ kubectl get pods -n kubevirt -l kubevirt.io=virt-handler
----

Select any of the pods listed in the output to run the following command:

[source,console]
----
$ kubectl exec -n kubevirt <virt-handler-pod> -- ls /proc/1/root/dev/kvm
Defaulted container "virt-handler" out of: virt-handler, virt-launcher (init)
/proc/1/root/dev/kvm
----

> If the file is absent, VMs cannot be scheduled on that node regardless of how KubeVirt is configured. On cloud providers, nested virtualization is typically disabled by default and must be explicitly enabled on the node pool or instance group before the nodes are created — it cannot be patched onto existing nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the file is absent, VMs cannot be scheduled on that node regardless of how KubeVirt is configured. On cloud providers, nested virtualization is typically disabled by default and must be explicitly enabled on the node pool or instance group before the nodes are created. Nested virtualization cannot be patched onto existing nodes.
```

[#dedicated-node-pool]
=== Dedicated node pool for VM workloads (optional)

Running runner VMs on a dedicated node pool, separate from the nodes that run KubeVirt's own control plane components (`virt-operator`, `virt-api`, `virt-controller`), is recommended. This prevents VM workloads from competing with cluster infrastructure for resources.

> Nodes in this pool must have nested virtualization enabled (configured at node or instance creation time — it cannot be patched onto existing nodes). Details on how to enable nested virtualization for GCP, AKS, and AWS node pools are covered in the examples below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nodes in this pool must have nested virtualization enabled. Nested virtualization but be configured at node or instance creation time and cannot be patched onto existing nodes. Details on how to enable nested virtualization for GCP, AKS, and AWS node pools are covered in the following sections.
```

[#tainted-nodes]
=== Tainted nodes (optional)

> Taint the nodes to prevent arbitrary workloads from landing on them while still allowing `virt-launcher` pods through.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Taint the nodes to prevent arbitrary workloads from landing on them while still allowing `virt-launcher` pods through. For information on Taints and Tolerations, see the link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/taint-and-toleration/[Kubernetes Documentation].
```

Reviewer: In this line are we directing the reader to actually go and do the thing now? Or are we describing what we are going to be doing in the examples in the following sections? Wasn't quite clear to me

Then patch the `virt-handler` so it can run on the tainted nodes. The KubeVirt operator manages the DaemonSet, so this must go through the KubeVirt CR rather than a direct patch. Replace the toleration key with the taint key you applied to your nodes:

[source,console]
----
$ kubectl patch kubevirt kubevirt -n kubevirt --type=merge -p='{
  "spec": {
    "customizeComponents": {
      "patches": [
        {
          "resourceName": "virt-handler",
          "resourceType": "DaemonSet",
          "patch": "{\"spec\":{\"template\":{\"spec\":{\"tolerations\":[{\"key\":\"CriticalAddonsOnly\",\"operator\":\"Exists\"},{\"key\":\"<your-taint-key>\",\"operator\":\"Exists\",\"effect\":\"NoSchedule\"}]}}}}",
          "type": "merge"
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}'
----

Use this patch command in the cloud provider examples below.

[#example-gke]
=== Example: GKE

> On GKE, use `gcloud` to create the node pool with nested virtualization and the taint applied in one step. GKE requires an `n2`, `n2d`, `c2`, or `c2d` series machine type — `e2` instances do not support nested virtualization. In the command below, the node pool creates nodes with a taint applied using `kubevirt` as the taint key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On GKE, use `gcloud` to create the node pool with nested virtualization and the taint applied in one step. GKE requires an `n2`, `n2d`, `c2`, or `c2d` series machine type. `e2` instances do not support nested virtualization. In the command below, the node pool creates nodes with a taint applied using `kubevirt` as the taint key.
```

----

Then reference it in values:

.my-values.yaml
[source,yaml]
----
provisioner:
  existingSecret: "my-secret"
----

[#vm-specification-notes]
=== VM specification notes

The `spec` field is a KubeVirt `VirtualMachineInstanceSpec`. The provisioner always appends a cloud-init disk and volume automatically — do not add one yourself.

VM OS support is limited to Debian/Ubuntu and RHEL/CentOS based images. Other Linux distributions are not supported.

The startup script performs the following steps on each VM:

. Detects the OS and installs `circleci-runner` from packagecloud.io.
. Injects the runner auth token into `/etc/circleci-runner/circleci-runner-config.yaml`.
. Configures the runner in single-task mode (one job per VM lifetime).
. Optionally sets `idle_timeout` in the runner config.
. Configures systemd to power off the VM after the runner process exits.
. Starts the runner service.

[#scaling-behavior]
== Scaling behavior

Desired replicas are calculated as unclaimed tasks plus running tasks, clamped to `[minReplicas, maxReplicas]`.

* The scaler polls CircleCI every one second.
* `minReplicas` VMs are always kept running as a pre-warmed pool.

> * When demand drops, excess VMs drain naturally: they pick up no new jobs and shut down after completing their current job (or after `idleTimeout` if set).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When demand drops, excess VMs drain naturally. That is, they pick up no new jobs and shut down after completing their current job (or after `idleTimeout` if set).
```

* Draining excess pre-scaled VMs when demand drops.
* Cycling VMs after a spec or config update (old VMs will eventually time out and be replaced).

[#rbac]
== RBAC

The Helm chart creates a `ServiceAccount`, `Role`, and `RoleBinding` scoped to the target namespace. The provisioner requires the following permissions:

[.table-scroll]
--
[cols="2,3", options="header"]
|===
| Resource
| Verbs

| `secrets`
| `get`, `list`, `watch`, `create`, `update`, `patch`

| `virtualmachinepools` (`pool.kubevirt.io`)
| `get`, `list`, `watch`, `create`, `update`, `patch`

| `virtualmachinepools/scale`
| `get`, `update`

| `virtualmachines` (`kubevirt.io`)
| `get`, `list`, `watch`, `patch`, `delete`
|===
--

[#observability]
== Observability

[.table-scroll]
--
[cols="1,1,3", options="header"]
|===
| Endpoint
| Port
| Purpose

| `GET /ready`
| `8000`
| Readiness probe

| `GET /live`
| `8001`
| Liveness probe
|===
--

Logs are written to stderr in JSON format.

[#confirming-scaler-polling]
=== Confirming the scaler is polling

> The scaler emits a log entry on every poll cycle (every one second) as part of a span named `worker loop scaler`. Each entry includes these fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The scaler emits a log entry on every poll cycle (every one second) as part of a span named `worker loop scaler`. Each entry includes the following fields:
```

[.table-scroll]
--
[cols="2,3", options="header"]
|===
| Field
| Description

| `unclaimed_tasks`
| Number of queued jobs waiting to be claimed

| `running_tasks`
| Number of jobs currently running on runner VMs

| `desired_vms`
| Replica count the scaler calculated (unclaimed + running, clamped to `[minReplicas, maxReplicas]`)

| `loop_name`
| Always `scaler`
|===
--

A healthy idle state (no jobs queued, pool at `minReplicas`) looks like:

[source,json]
----
{"loop_name":"scaler","unclaimed_tasks":0,"running_tasks":0,"desired_vms":3}
----

A healthy active state (jobs queued, scaler responding):

[source,json]
----
{"loop_name":"scaler","unclaimed_tasks":4,"running_tasks":2,"desired_vms":6}
----

> If `desired_vms` is not changing in response to queued jobs, check:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `desired_vms` is not changing in response to queued jobs, check the following:
```

> * `unclaimed_tasks` is always 0 — the `CIRCLE_TOKEN` may be invalid or pointing at the wrong resource class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If `unclaimed_tasks` is always 0, the `CIRCLE_TOKEN` may be invalid or pointing at the wrong resource class.
```

> * `desired_vms` is not increasing past a fixed number — the scaler is hitting `maxReplicas`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If `desired_vms` is not increasing past a fixed number, the scaler is hitting `maxReplicas`.
```

Scaler errors appear as log entries with messages like `failed to get unclaimed tasks` or `failed to get running tasks`, indicating the provisioner cannot reach the CircleCI API.

[#upgrading]
== Upgrading

> 

Reviewer: Can we give some context around when people should follow these upgrade instructions?

Author: I think after preview we can probably add something. Mostly upgrades would happen when new versions of the service become available.

Update your `my-values.yaml` and run:

[source,console]
----
$ helm upgrade runner-provisioner ./chart \
  --namespace runner-provisioner \
  --values my-values.yaml
----

The deployment pod annotation `checksum/config` is derived from the Secret contents, so a config-only change (for example, a new token or VM spec) triggers a pod rollout automatically.

Configuration changes (tokens, API address, VM spec) are injected into VMs at first boot via cloud-init and are not re-applied to running VMs. After a `helm upgrade`, existing VMs continue using their original config until they are recreated. Two rollout options are available:

> * *Graceful rollout — no job interruption*: Set `idleTimeout` in your values before upgrading. VMs will shut down on their own once they finish their current job and go idle. The pool recreates them with the updated config. This is the right choice when you cannot interrupt in-progress jobs, but rollout is slow — it completes only once every existing VM has either run a job to completion or timed out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Graceful rollout — no job interruption*: Set `idleTimeout` in your values before upgrading. VMs will shut down on their own once they finish their current job and go idle. The pool recreates the VMs with the updated config. This is the right choice when you cannot interrupt in-progress jobs, but rollout is slow and completes only once every existing VM has either run a job to completion or timed out.
```

[source,console]
----
$ kubectl patch deployment virt-operator -n kubevirt --type=json \
  -p='[{"op":"remove","path":"/spec/template/spec/affinity/nodeAffinity/requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution"}]'

$ kubectl label nodes --all node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane=
----

[#limitations]
== Limitations

[#architectural-limits]
=== Current architectural limits

* Only one resource class is supported per provisioner deployment. Run multiple deployments for multiple resource classes.
* VM OS must be Debian/Ubuntu or RHEL/CentOS based.
* The provisioner requires KubeVirt's `VirtualMachinePool` API (`pool.kubevirt.io`).

[#preview-stage-gaps]
=== Preview-stage gaps

The following capabilities are not yet available and are planned before general availability:

* Multi-resource-class support in a single deployment.
* Metrics endpoint (Prometheus-compatible).
* Windows guest OS support for runner VMs (the cloud-init startup script is Linux-only).

> If any of these are blocking your use case, post in the `#runner-provisioner-preview` Slack channel or reach out via the preview Slack channel.

Reviewer: > post in the `#runner-provisioner-preview` Slack channel or reach out via the preview Slack channel

Aren't they the same thing?

Author: They are.

[#vm-startup-latency]
=== VM startup latency

When a new VM needs to be provisioned from scratch, expect two to five minutes before a runner is ready to claim a job. This includes scheduling the VM, booting the OS, and running the cloud-init script that downloads and installs the runner agent.

> The primary mitigation is `minReplicas`: pre-warmed VMs have already completed startup and can claim jobs in seconds. Startup latency only affects jobs that arrive when demand exceeds the pre-warmed pool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The primary mitigation is `minReplicas`. Pre-warmed VMs have already completed startup and can claim jobs in seconds. Startup latency only affects jobs that arrive when demand exceeds the pre-warmed pool.
```

* *Troubleshooting issues*
* *Bugs and feature requests*
* *General questions*

Do not open a support ticket for issues with Runner Provisioner. Issues are routed directly to the product team with a 24-hour internal response target.

[#prerequisites]
== Prerequisites

* A Kubernetes cluster with KubeVirt installed. Refer to the link:https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/main/docs/compatibility.md[KubeVirt compatibility matrix] for the appropriate version for your cluster. Runner Provisioner has been tested with v1.8.
* `kubectl` configured against your cluster.
* `helm` v3+.
* A CircleCI runner resource class and its associated resource class token. Create one in the CircleCI web app under **Self-Hosted Runners**. This token is used by the agent running on the VM to authenticate with CircleCI and claim and execute jobs for that resource class.
* A CircleCI API token with permission to query runner tasks. This may be a personal API token or a project API token with read-only access.
* An image pull secret named `regcred` in the target namespace. The Helm chart references this by default.

[#cluster-requirements]

> == Cluster requirements

Reviewer: Is it right to say the cluster requirements section are part of prerequisites? requirements, optional best practices and platform specific examples? I'll sort out the heading levels if so

Author: Yes.
